docs: add docu for experimental OTLP log feature (#1990)
kyma-project/telemetry-manager: docs/user/logs.md

The goal of the Telemetry module is to support you in collecting all relevant logs of a workload in a Kyma cluster and ship them to a backend for further analysis. Hereby, especially application logs printed to the stdout/stderr channel are in scope as well as logs emmitted via OTLP. Kyma modules like [Istio](https://kyma-project.io/#/istio/user/README) contribute access logs instantly, and the Telemetry module enriches the data. You can choose among multiple [vendors for OTLP-based backends](https://opentelemetry.io/ecosystem/vendors/).

## Overview

The Telemetry module provides a log gateway for push-based collection of logs and, optionally, an agent for the collection of logs of any container running in the Kyma runtime.

You can configure the log gateway and agent with external systems using runtime configuration with a dedicated Kubernetes API ([CRD](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/extend-kubernetes/api-extension/custom-resources/#customresourcedefinitions)) named LogPipeline.
The Log feature is optional. If you don't want to use it, simply don't set up a LogPipeline.

## Prerequisites

> - Before you can collect logs from a component, it must emit (or instrument) the logs. Typically, it uses a logger framework for the used language runtime (like Node.js) and prints them to the `stdout` or `stderr` channel, see also the [Kubernetes recommendation](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/cluster-administration/logging/#how-nodes-handle-container-logs). Alternatively, you can use the [OTel SDK](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/languages/) to use the [push-based OTLP format](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otlp/).

Author: removed one word

kind: LogPipeline
metadata:
  name: backend
spec:
  input:
    application:
      enabled: true
  output:
    otlp:
      ...
```

By default, input is collected from all namespaces, except the system namespaces `kube-system`, `istio-system`, `kyma-system`, which are excluded by default.

To filter your application logs by namespace or container, use an input spec to restrict or specify which resources you want to include. For example, you can define the namespaces to include in the input collection, exclude namespaces from the input collection, or choose that only system namespaces are included. Learn more about the available [parameters and attributes](resources/02-logpipeline.md).

The following example collects input from all namespaces excluding `kyma-system` and only from the `istio-proxy` containers:

```yaml
apiVersion: telemetry.kyma-project.io/v1alpha1
kind: LogPipeline
metadata:
  name: backend
spec:
  input:
    application:
      enabled: true
      namespaces:
        exclude:
          - myNamespace
      containers:
        exclude:
          - myContainer
    otlp:
      ...
```

#### Log Attributes

#### Timestamps

#### Severity

#### Body

> ### 5. Deactivate OTLP Logs

Reviewer: Is it mandatory or optional? 

Why would I want to deactivate OTLP logs when I have two pipelines (two log pipelines, or any two pipelines, also including trace or metric?) enabled?

> ### 5. Deactivate OTLP Logs

Author: It is an optional feature, like also the log tailing above is optional. If I want to push only logs from the tail input to one backend, and all other logs from the otlp push input to another backend, then I will need to disable the otlp input in the first one

> ### 5. Deactivate OTLP Logs

Reviewer: How about this:

```suggestion
### 5. Deactivate OTLP Logs

If you have more than one backend, you can specify from which `input` logs are pushed to each backend. For example, if OTLP logs should go to one backend and only logs from the tail input to the other backend, then disable the OTLP input for the second backend.
```

By default, `otlp` input is enabled.

To drop the push-based OTLP logs that are received by the Log gateway, define a LogPipeline that has the `otlp` section disabled as an input:

```yaml
apiVersion: telemetry.kyma-project.io/v1alpha1
kind: LogPipeline
metadata:
  name: backend
spec:
  input:
    application:
      enabled: true
    otlp:
      disabled: true
  output:
    otlp:
      endpoint:
        value: https://backend.example.com:4317
```

With this, the agent starts collecting all container logs, and the push-based OTLP logs are dropped by the gateway.

### 6. Deploy the Pipeline

To activate the LogPipeline, apply the `logpipeline.yaml` resource file in your cluster:

```bash
kubectl apply -f logpipeline.yaml
```

### Result

You activated a LogPipeline and logs start streaming to your backend.

To check that the pipeline is running, wait until the status conditions of the LogPipeline in your cluster have status `True`:

```bash
kubectl get logpipeline
NAME      CONFIGURATION GENERATED   GATEWAY HEALTHY   AGENT HEALTHY   FLOW HEALTHY
backend   True                      True              True            True        
```

## Kyma Modules With Logging Capabilities

> Kyma bundles several modules that can be involved in user flows. Here, all logs can be collected optionally by enabling the `application` input for the `kyma-system` namespace. On top of this, the following modules have some dedicated integration options:

Author: I improved the sentence

A LogPipeline runs several OTel Collector instances in your cluster. This Deployment serves OTLP endpoints and ships received data to the configured backend.

The Telemetry module ensures that the OTel Collector instances are operational and healthy at any time, for example, with buffering and retries. However, there may be situations when the instances drop logs, or cannot handle the log load.

To detect and fix such situations, check the [pipeline status](./resources/02-logpipeline.md#logpipeline-status) and check out [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting). If you have set up [pipeline health monitoring](./04-metrics.md#5-monitor-pipeline-health), check the alerts and reports in an integrated backend like [SAP Cloud Logging](./integration/sap-cloud-logging/README.md#use-sap-cloud-logging-alerts).

> [! WARNING]
> It's not recommended to access the metrics endpoint of the used OTel Collector instances directly, because the exposed metrics are no official API of the Kyma Telemetry module. Breaking changes can happen if the underlying OTel Collector version introduces such.
> Instead, use the [pipeline status](./resources/05-metricpipeline.md#metricpipeline-status).

## Limitations

> - **Throughput**: N/A

Author: wrote text instead. The number will be provided before GA

# Application Logs (Experimental)

> The Telemetry module collects logs of workloads in your Kyma cluster and ship them to a backend for further analysis.

Author: Knowing for what application logs are useful for does not help me. I still need to understand what now this module will do for me. So only if we combine the two sentences.

> The Telemetry module collects logs of workloads in your Kyma cluster and ship them to a backend for further analysis.

Reviewer: We talk about what the module does in the Telemetry Module (readme) doc. This one is about Application Logs. 
Let's try to combine it. How about something like this:

```suggestion
With application logs, you can debug an application and derive the internal state of an application. The Telemetry module supports observing your applications with logs of the correct severity level and context.
```

- If you want to emit the logs to the `stdout/stderr` channel, use structured logs in a JSON format with a logger library like log4J. With that, the log agent can parse your log and enrich all JSON attributes as log attributes, and a backend can make use of that.

- If you prefer the push-based alternative with OTLP, also use a logger library like log4J. However, you additionally instrument that logger and bridge it to the OTel SDK. For details, see [OpenTelemetry: New First-Party Application Logs](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/logs/#new-first-party-application-logs).

## Architecture

In the Telemetry module, a central in-cluster Deployment of an [OTel Collector](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/collector/) acts as a gateway. The gateway exposes endpoints for the [OpenTelemetry Protocol (OTLP)](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otlp/) for GRPC and HTTP-based communication using the dedicated `telemetry-otlp-logs` service, to which your applications send the logs data.

You can choose whether you also want an agent, based on a DaemonSet of an OTel Collector. This agent can tail logs of a container from the underlying container runtime.

> ![Architecture](./assets/logs-arch.drawio.svg)

Author: same comment as below, right?

> ![Architecture](./assets/logs-arch.drawio.svg)

Reviewer: I am very consistent in my brilliant suggestions!

Let's keep it as is for now, but I might take another look at the diagram in the future.

1. Application containers print JSON logs to `stdout/stderr` channel and are stored by the Kubernetes container runtime under the `var/log` directory and its subdirectories at the related Node. Istio is configured to write access logs to `stdout` as well.
2. An OTel Collector runs as a [DaemonSet](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/daemonset/) (one instance per Node), detects any new log files in the folder, and tails and parses them.
3. An application (exposing logs in OTLP) sends logs to the central log gateway service. Istio is configured to push access logs with OTLP as well.
4. The gateway and agent discover the metadata and enrich all received data with metadata of the source by communicating with the Kubernetes APIServer. Furthermore, they filter data according to the pipeline configuration.

> 5. Telemetry Manager configures the agent and gateway according to the `LogPipeline` resource specification, including the target backend. Also, it observes the logs flow to the backend and reports problems in the LogPipeline status.

Author: It generates the agent and the gateway.. so two additional lines which will make the lines a mess. I prefered to keep it more simple and focus. on actual data flow only

> 5. Telemetry Manager configures the agent and gateway according to the `LogPipeline` resource specification, including the target backend. Also, it observes the logs flow to the backend and reports problems in the LogPipeline status.

Reviewer: Then why include the Telemetry Manager box in the diagram at all?

> 5. Telemetry Manager configures the agent and gateway according to the `LogPipeline` resource specification, including the target backend. Also, it observes the logs flow to the backend and reports problems in the LogPipeline status.

Author: added the arrows, have fun :P

#### JSON Parsing

If the value of the `body` is a JSON document, the value gets parsed and all JSON root attributes will get enriched as additional log attributes. The orginial body gets moved into the `log.original` attribute (managed via LogPipeline `input.application.keepOriginalBody: true` attribute).

> The resulting OTLP record will look like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The resulting OTLP record looks like the following example:
```

```json
{
  "time": "2022-05-23T15:04:52.100000000Z",
  "observedTime": "2022-05-23T15:04:52.200000000",
  "attributes": {
   "log.file.path": "/var/log/pods/myNamespace_myPod-<containerID>/myContainer/<containerRestarts>.log",
   "log.iostream": "stdout",
   "log.original": "{\"level\": \"warn\",\"message\": \"This is the actual message\",\"tenant\": \"myTenant\",\"trace_id\": \"123\"}",
   "level": "warn",
   "tenant": "myTenant",
   "trace_id": "123",
   "message": "This is the actual message"
  },
  "resourceAttributes": {
    "k8s.container.name": "myContainer",
    "k8s.container.restart_count": "<containerRestarts>",
    "k8s.pod.name": "myPod",
    "k8s.namespace.name": "myNamespace"
  },
  "body": ""
}
```

#### Severity Parsing

> As typicaly a log message has a log level written to a field `level`, the agent will try to parse the log attribute `level` with a [severity parser](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/main/pkg/stanza/docs/operators/severity_parser.md). If that is successful, the log attribute gets transformed into the OTEL `severityText`and `severityNumber` attributes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Typically, a log message has a log level written to a field `level`. Based on that, the agent tries to parse the log attribute `level` with a [severity parser](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/main/pkg/stanza/docs/operators/severity_parser.md). If that is successful, the log attribute is transformed into the OTel `severityText`and `severityNumber` attributes.
```

#### Trace Parsing

> OTLP natively supports attaching trace context to log records. Hereby, the ganet will try to parse it from log attributes with name `trace_id`, `span_id` and `trace_flags`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OTLP natively supports attaching trace context to log records. The log agent tries to parse it from the log attributes called `trace_id`, `span_id`, and `trace_flags`.
```

#### Log Body Determination

> As the actual log message should be located in the `body` attribute, the agent will move a log attribute with name `message` or `msg` into the `body`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because the actual log message is typically located in the `body` attribute, the agent moves a log attribute called `message` (or `msg`) into the `body`.
```
why "should be" - in which cases is that typically not the case? I assume those would be rare edge cases?

> The resulting overal log record before further gateway typical enrichement logic will look like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At this point, before further enrichment, the resulting overall log record looks like the following example:
```

```yaml
apiVersion: telemetry.kyma-project.io/v1alpha1
kind: LogPipeline
metadata:
  name: backend
spec:
  input:
    application:
      enabled: true
    otlp:
      disabled: true
  output:
    otlp:
      endpoint:
        value: https://backend.example.com:4317
```

With this, the agent starts collecting all container logs, while the push-based OTLP logs are dropped by the gateway.

### 6. Deploy the Pipeline

To activate the LogPipeline, apply the `logpipeline.yaml` resource file in your cluster:

```bash
kubectl apply -f logpipeline.yaml
```

### Result

You activated a LogPipeline and logs start streaming to your backend.

To check that the pipeline is running, wait until the status conditions of the LogPipeline in your cluster have status `True`:

```bash
kubectl get logpipeline
NAME      CONFIGURATION GENERATED   GATEWAY HEALTHY   AGENT HEALTHY   FLOW HEALTHY
backend   True                      True              True            True        
```

## Kyma Modules With Logging Capabilities

Kyma bundles modules that can be involved in user flows. If you want to collect all logs of all modules, enable the `application` input for the `kyma-system` namespace.

### Istio

> The Istio module is crucial as it provides the [Ingress Gateway](https://istio.io/latest/docs/tasks/traffic-management/ingress/ingress-control/). Typically, this is where external requests enter the cluster scope. Furthermore, every component that’s part of the Istio Service Mesh runs an Istio proxy. Using the Istio telemetry API you can enable access logs for the Ingress Gateway and the proxies individually.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Istio module is crucial as it provides the [Ingress Gateway](https://istio.io/latest/docs/tasks/traffic-management/ingress/ingress-control/). Typically, this is where external requests enter the cluster scope. Furthermore, every component that’s part of the Istio Service Mesh runs an Istio proxy. Using the Istio telemetry API, you can enable access logs for the Ingress Gateway and the proxies individually.
```

The Istio module is configured with an [extension provider](https://istio.io/latest/docs/tasks/observability/telemetry/) called `kyma-logs`. To activate the provider on the global mesh level using the Istio [Telemetry API](https://istio.io/latest/docs/reference/config/telemetry), place a resource to the `istio-system` namespace. The following code samples help setting up the Istio logging feature:

> 

Reviewer: Line 508 ends with "The following code samples..." and line 510 starts with "The following example...". Atm, this sounds a bit redundant, but I assume you'll keep adding more examples so that the sentence in line 508 is justified.

Author: done

A LogPipeline runs several OTel Collector instances in your cluster. This Deployment serves OTLP endpoints and ships received data to the configured backend.

The Telemetry module ensures that the OTel Collector instances are operational and healthy at any time, for example, with buffering and retries. However, there may be situations when the instances drop logs, or cannot handle the log load.

To detect and fix such situations, check the [pipeline status](./resources/02-logpipeline.md#logpipeline-status) and check out [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting). If you have set up [pipeline health monitoring](./04-metrics.md#5-monitor-pipeline-health), check the alerts and reports in an integrated backend like [SAP Cloud Logging](./integration/sap-cloud-logging/README.md#use-sap-cloud-logging-alerts).

> [! WARNING]
> It's not recommended to access the metrics endpoint of the used OTel Collector instances directly, because the exposed metrics are no official API of the Kyma Telemetry module. Breaking changes can happen if the underlying OTel Collector version introduces such.
> Instead, use the [pipeline status](./resources/05-metricpipeline.md#metricpipeline-status).

## Limitations

> - **Throughput**: The maximum throughput is limited. The actual number gets defined when the feature is out of experimental status.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Throughput**: The maximum throughput is limited.
```
I don't think we need this sentence right now. Let's add it when we know the specific number.

Author: done
